CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW

2.0 Introduction 
The literature of this study shall comprised of definition and descriptions, history of building 
typology, types of building types and criteria for categorization, basic functions, spaces and space 
relationships common to building typology, problems identified with building typology, common 
and unique solutions to problem of buildings typology (form, structural stability, material, 
lighting, ventilation and general services, lessons learned through reviewed literature, and 
conceptual approach to design building typology.

2.1 Definition and Descriptions of Hotel and Resorts
Definition
Hotel; The Hotel Law, 1935 Article 3, indicated that the word hotel refers to all places constituted 
to receive the payment from travelers or people who quest for lodging or temporary stay. 
(Daengroj, 2001). The word 'Hotel' in the Longman Dictionary of American English (1983) gave 
a definition of "a building where people can stay, in return for payment". This refers to a place 
where people can stay through payment. In the New Model English-Thai Dictionary (Sethaputra, 
2002) gave the definition that the word 'hotel' refers to the big hotel, the mansion, or the 
government offices, such as Hotel de Ville.
Before there was the word 'hotel' there was the word accommodation or places for travelers, which 
has a more extensive meaning than the word 'hotel'. However, the hotel is the accommodation for 
travelers who wish have lodging through payment to the proprietor.
The accommodation refers to a temporary lodging, where travelers may rest and take a sleep. The 
accommodation is a prime significant for the traveling, which is important for the people, 
economically, culturally, and socially.
The form of accommodation should be suitably in concordance with the environment. This might 
be an endemic style or a modern style, depending on the surrounding. This conduces a diversity 
of accommodation formats. Therefore, the lodging has many types and many prices, with a variety 
of required conveniences.
The word 'hotel industry' can be concluded as the Business administration pertaining to the 
lodging, put up to receive payments from travelers or the people who seek for a temporary stay, 
with services on the food, drink, and a systematic control on the particular administration.
Before there was the word 'hotel' there was the word accommodation or places for travelers, which 
has a more extensive meaning than the word 'hotel'. However, the hotel is the accommodation for 
travelers who wish have lodging through payment to the proprietor.
The accommodation refers to a temporary lodging, where travelers may rest and take a sleep. The 
accommodation is a prime significant for the traveling, which is important for the people, 
economically, culturally, and socially.
The form of accommodation should be suitably in concordance with the environment. This might 
be an endemic style or a modern style, depending on the surrounding. This conduces a diversity 
of accommodation formats. Therefore, the lodging has many types and many prices, with a variety 
of required conveniences.
A hotel is an establishment that provides paid lodging on a short-term basis. Facilities provided 
may range from a modest-quality mattress in a small room to large suites with bigger, higherquality beds, a dresser, a refrigerator and other kitchen facilities, upholstered chairs, a flat screen 
television, and en-suite bathrooms. Small, lower-priced hotels may offer only the most basic guest 
services and facilities. Larger, higher-priced hotels may provide additional guest facilities such as 
a swimming pool, business centre (with computers, printers, and other office equipment), 
childcare, conference and event facilities, tennis or basketball courts, gymnasium, restaurants, day 
spa, and social function services. Hotel rooms are usually numbered (or named in some smaller 
hotels and B&Bs) to allow guests to identify their room. Some boutique, high-end hotels have 
custom decorated rooms. Some hotels offer meals as part of a room and board arrangement. In the 
United Kingdom, a hotel is required by law to serve food and drinks to all guests within certain 
stated hours. In Japan, capsule hotels provide a tiny room suitable only for sleeping and shared 
bathroom facilities.
A resort (North American English) is a self-contained commercial establishment that tries to 
provide most of a vacationer's wants, such as food, drink, lodging, sports, entertainment, and 
shopping, on the premises. The term resort may be used for a hotel property that provides an array 
of amenities, typically including entertainment and recreational activities. A hotel is frequently a 
central feature of a resort, such as the Grand Hotel at Mackinac Island, Michigan. Some resorts 
are also condominium complexes that are timeshares or owed fractionally or wholly owned 
condominium. A resort is not always a commercial establishment operated by a single company, 
but in the late 20th century, that sort of facility became more common.
In British English "resort" means a town which people visit for holidays and days out which usually 
contains hotels at which such holidaymakers stay. Examples would include Blackpool and 
Brighton.
Resorts combine a hotel and a variety of recreations, such as swimming pools, as shown in this 
image in San Diego, California
A destination resort is a resort that itself contains the necessary guest attraction capabilities so it 
does not need to be near a destination (town, historic site, theme park, or other) to attract its patrons. 
A commercial establishment at a resort destination such as a recreational area, a scenic or historic 
site, a theme park, a gaming facility, or other tourist attraction may compete with other businesses 
at a destination. Consequently, another quality of a destination resort is that it offers food, drink, 
lodging, sports, entertainment, and shopping within the facility so that guests have no need to leave 
the facility throughout their stay. Commonly, the facilities are of higher quality than would be 
expected if one were to stay at a hotel or eat in a town's restaurants. Some examples are Atlantis 
in the Bahamas; the Walt Disney World Resort, near Orlando, Florida, United States; PortAventura 
World, near Barcelona on the Costa Daurada in Spain; Costa do Sauípe, Northeastern Brazil; 
Laguna Phuket, Thailand and Sun City, near Johannesburg, South Africa. Closely related to resorts 
are convention and large meeting sites. Generally, they occur in cities, where special meeting halls, 
together with ample accommodations and varied dining and entertainment, are provided.
An all-inclusive resort charges a fixed price that includes most or all items. At a minimum, most 
inclusive resorts include lodging, unlimited food, drink, sports activities, and entertainment for the 
fixed price. In recent years, the number of resorts in the United States offering "all-inclusive" 
amenities has decreased dramatically. In 1961, over half offered such plans, but in 2007, less than 
a tenth do so 
All-inclusive resorts are found in the Caribbean, particularly in Dominican Republic; in Egypt, 
and elsewhere. Notable examples are Club Med, Sandals Resorts, and Beaches Resorts 
An all-inclusive resort includes three meals daily, soft drinks, most alcoholic drinks, gratuities, 
and usually other services in the price. Many also offer sports and other activities included in the 
price as well. They are often located in warmer regions. The all-inclusive model originated in the 
Club Med resorts, which were founded by the Belgian Gérard Blitz. 
Some all-inclusive resorts are designed for specific vacation interests. For example, certain resorts 
cater to adults, and even more-specialized properties accept couples only. Other all-inclusive 
resorts are geared toward families, with facilities like craft centers, game rooms, and water parks 
to keep children of all ages entertained. All-inclusive resorts are also very popular locations for 
destination weddings.

2.2 Descriptions
The hotel industry is the servicing business conducing another significant branch in the economic 
development of the country. The hotel industry associates many types of industry, such as the 
tourist industry, the transportation industry, and the food servicing industry. It is apparent that 
every country emphasizes on the significance of this kind of industry, with a belief that this is a 
source for employment, disseminating the income of the country, conducing the country's 
progression, especially the progressing country around the world. It is accepted that the hotel 
industry brings a high income to the country. Therefore, the government sector and the public 
sector should cooperate in promoting this kind of business. Whereby, the public sector would make 
the investment, and the government sector would support. It is complacent that generally the hotel 
industry in Nigeria is being internationally accepted, due to the modernization of the hotel and the 
optimum service. The amiability to foreigners avails the progression of this kind of business. The 
Oriental Hotel is an example of success for Hotel, in receiving the world best hotel award for eight 
consecutive years. This enables the image for the hotel business to become in one of the top levels 
in the eyes of foreigners.
Presently, various hotels expanded the network and branches, with a belief that the hotel business 
is still going well in Nigeria, because people are still much interested to make a tour in this region 
of the world. Moreover, the booming tourist industry is enchanting people to put in more 
investment. These factors would conduct a great income to the country. More people give better 
interest in the study of the Hotel Academic. There was the intense teaching, training, and learning 
in this subject, to concur with the growth of this business. On the overall, this is directly 
advantageous to the hospitality industry. Because administrators and the operators attained the 
knowledge in the hotel business administration with a correct servicing knowledge, this would 
also be advantageous to other relevant business.

2.3 History of Hotel and Resorts Development
The Development of Hotel industry is believed to have dated back to Twelve thousand years ago. 
The primitive people of the Era were known to be living in comparative isolation. Inns were 
existence in very ancient times to serve Merchants, Soldiers, Adventurers, Religious pilgrims and 
other travelers who needed a place to eat and sleep.
The inns of those days were nothing more than a small portion of private dwellings. Typically, the 
inns were self-service institutions, rarely clean and more often than not run by a disreputable 
landlord. The earliest development of commercial or public lodging occurred along the important 
trade routes. The Egyptians and Babylonians had caravansaries while inns in the form of "Khan" 
were more popular in the Persian Empire. At this time, the Greeks maintained their lodging houses 
for travelers near or within their temples.
The spread of Roman Empire made travel easier and more frequent. In Rome itself and in many 
places throughout Italy, the traders and provincials’ officers were housed in public inns. 
Throughout the empire, the
travelers still found lodging almost everywhere in temple inns. These inns prevailed with little 
changes for a very long period. 
Industrial Revolution in England brought about progress and new ideas in the business of inn 
keeping. The early Development of the English inns was centered in and around London. inn 
keepers increased services, maintained higher standards of cleanliness and to greater extent catered 
for the guests. During this Era, (1850 - 1920), English inns gained the reputation of being the finest 
in the world and attained their peak during the middle of the 19Ih century.
Across the sea in the colonies, the early inns were located in the sea ports towns and patterned 
directly after the inns of the mother country, while the English landlords was contended to maintain 
the status quo, his American counterpart demonstrated no such inhibitions. The American inn 
keeper was an innovator, a gambler, and an expansionist. They were setting a standard for size and 
shortly after the Revolution; American inns became the largest in the world.
The word "hotel" was adopted first in France and few years later in England about the end of the 
18' century to signify departure from the customary method of housing guests to something more 
luxurious and ostentatious. The new hotel had its first great development in Switzerland during 
the early years of the 19" century. The Swiss hotel keepers of the period originated the idea Resort 
Hotel.
The Swiss Hotel became what it has remained today, an international institution. It was the model 
for the hotels which sprang up all over Europe
In 1829, the first modern first-class hotel was conceived in Boston known as the "Hotel Tremont" 
with 170 rooms. The Hotel Tremont was nicknamed "the Adam and Eve of the Modem Hotel 
Industry." The Tremont was something absolutely new in the field of hotel keeping and in a class 
by itself towering over all it contemporaries both in America and Europe. It was the largest and 
costliest building that had ever been erected in America.
The excitement to put up better more luxurious hotel was at its peak between, (1830 - 1850). 
Following the excitements by the first Statler hotel, there was a period of relative quietness and 
inactiveness in the development of the hotel industry. Part of this was enforced by World War I. 
The twentieth century ushered in another golden age of hotels. Hotels increased both in number 
and size. In 1927, the Steven's Hotel (later the Conrad Hilton Hotel) was opened in Chicago with 
3,000 rooms and retained the title of the world's largest hotel until 1967 when the Hotel Rossiya 
with 3,200 rooms was opened in Moscow. Hotel budding declined sharply during the econodz 
depression of the 1930's.
The outbreak of World War II set into motion the greatest period of mass movement the world had 
ever experienced. The initial effects of the war
were therefore mostly negative. Rated non-essential, most hotels lost half of
their staff to armed services within a year.
The later hotel boom companied the development of mass travel in the late 1950s and early 1960's. 
Another milestone in the development of Hotel Construction was the opening in October 27, 1952 
of the Los Angeles Statler. The tremendous increase in automobile and good roads, rail roads and 
airways opened up new areas that have hotel potentials. As a result, newer hotels are now 
frequently located outside the city at airports and on highways.
The twentieth (20th) century has proved or proven to be a period of tremendous
change and development in the hotel industry. In has witnessed the birth of
the modem commercial hotels.

2.3.1 Hotel Development in Nigeria
In Nigerian, travelers sought shelter, food and accommodation in homes before the advent of the 
Europeans. Hospitality to strangers and extended family system was part of Nigerian culture. A 
Nigerian host was too glad to give his guest food and shelter which shows a mark of affluence. 
The acceptance of a stranger has some religious undertones as the visitor is regarded as a 
representative of a god. Therefore, to deny him hospitality is to invite the wrath of the gods.
During the early colonial period, rest houses in villages were established by the white men. This 
later developed into real catering rest houses and visitors started paying for food, lodging and other 
services. As time went by, commercial activities emerged and expanded, commercial and 
administrative towns were founded.
Most significant in this period were the increase in population and organization of administration 
beyond the tribal and village levels. Again with technological breakthroughs, increasing 
complexity of life, oil boom and higher income, hotel development and management assumed an 
increasing dimension and complexity in Nigeria.
The development of commercial centres such as Aba, Lagos, Kano, Port Harcourt, Onitsha, etc. 
brought with it the type of hotel development that already existed in Europe and America. In 
addition, the FESTAC 1977, international conventions and various continental sporting, activities 
being hosted in Nigeria were all responsible for the rapid development of hotel industries in 
Nigeria.
To this end, a lot of money was pumped into hoteI industry by federal and
state governments. Private individuals and corporate organizations were not left out in this 
struggle. With the present quest of Nigerians for class identification, comfort and awareness for 
recreation and leisure, the hotel industry has come to stay in this country.
The 1978 creation of states and subsequent creation in 1989 and 199 1 have tremendously 
increased the need for more hotels of international standards in the country.
These historical account enumerated above have seen the metamorphosis of the simple 
organization and operation of hotel industry in the past into the complexities of the modem day 
hotel industry. However, it is generally believed that the country's Resort Hotel potentials have not 
been adequately tapped and harnessed.

2.4 Type of Hotels and Criteria for Categorization
Hotels can be classified in many categories as follows:

2.4.1 Commercial or Transient Hotel
Commercial hotels usually situate in the Down Town with the business concourse. Businessmen 
are content to accommodate in this type of hotels, because it is convenient in the business contact, 
with no need for long travels, passing all the traffic jam. It is convenient because this type of hotels 
is fully and conveniently accommodated, such as the food servicing, the swimming pool, the 
exercise room, the tennis lawn, karaoke room, dancing room, and the conference room. It is also
near various places; which businessmen may easily make business contacts. The communication 
is convenient, with all means of selectable transportation for servicing. In this type of hotels, 
clients can enter and leave all the time, while they would not rest in hotels for a long time

2.4.2 Resort Hotel
This is a resting hotel for tourists, these hotels would situate in the tour sources or in the resting 
sources such as on the seashores, the mountains, on the riverside, near the golf course, etc. 
Therefore, the conservation of natural beauty is a significant matter, because guests require 
contacting the beautiful nature, and at the same time, they also need to all the conveniences and 
facilities. Therefore, this type of hotel must be fully prepared for the conveniences and facilities, 
because the guests only wish to rest. In the hotel, there should be the golf course, riding course, 
and fitness. There should be all the exercises and activities for guests, such as the boat services, 
horses for riding, wind surf, and ski lawn. All these would enable the success for resort hotels.

2.4.3 Residential Hotel
Residential Hotel refers to the resident and not for commercial. Therefore, the residential hotel is 
the lodging, with a tenant contract and conditions between guests and the proprietor, where there 
would be an accommodation for a short time, or a long time. This length of time may take a month 
long, or a yearlong. However, there might be a condition that in the case of long term tenant, 
should the guest be absent for a long time, such as going to upcountry for a long time, the hotel 
has a right to let the room on a short basis, such as the Voldoft Astoria in New York, who are the 
Residential Hotel. They have temporary guests as well as permanent guests. In this case, the hotel 
conglomerate of Astoria has many branches, in Europe and in America.

2.4.4 Motel
Motel is the combination of the words 'Motel' to 'Hotel', This word had been initiated in the United
States before 1930. After the World War Il, when the economy started to revitalize, people sold 
more motor cars, and went on the travel. Travelers experienced all inconveniences in the lodging. 
This is usually in town, where the traffic was congested and jammed, with no parking space. In 
this 3ase, the motel must find all the facilitation for tourists, with a parking service right next to 
the bedroom, or sometimes, under the bedroom. Usually, motels do not have room services, 
because guests usually come to rest for only one night, before commencing on the travel in the 
next morning. Motels usually situate on the highways, and the accommodation service is executed 
for 24 hours.

2.4.5 Motor Hotel
The idea in building up Motor Hotels was initiated by Cammon Wilson, an American designer and 
fixed asset developer, who set his family on a tour. He encountered a great accommodation 
difficulty. After his tour, he contrived a new format for the hotel by collecting all conveniences 
with the travelers who owned cars. The format of the Motor Hotel is the medium hotel with 30 
rooms to 300 rooms, accommodated with parking spaces. The parking is free to compete with 
hotels that collect parking spaces. Moreover, there may be other services, such as the coffee shop, 
cocktail lounge, conference room, and swimming pool.
In 1953, the Holiday Inn hotel in the United States commenced its business with 100 rooms, and 
presently owned over 1624 branches with 317,506 rooms in the towns, and in the vicinity. The 
format of the Holiday Inn is the Motor Hotel, which was so successful that it becomes a franchise 
with high popularity.

2.4.6 Budget Hotel
The Budget Hotel or the Economy Hotel is to serve travelers who like the economy, cleanliness 
and modernity. This is usually a small size hotel, with little rooms. An example of this type of 
hotel is the Days Inn, which spread all over the United States. Sometimes, the Days Inn may be in 
the same place with a service station, while giving different services. This is the same as the Ibis 
in Europ2 and Japan. Quite a number of travelers prefer the economy hotels, especially in countries 
with high cost of living, where some groups of tourists are unable to accommodate in hotels with 
high services.

2.4.7 Condominium Apartment, Flat
The condominium is a suit condominium that is similar to an apartment or flat. The difference is 
that the owner of a condominium or the particular suit has an absolute tenure right, through the 
affirmative document under the agreed rules and regulations. Condominiums were initiated in 
Thailand from the sky rising cost of the land and the traffic congestion.
Presently, condominiums have a character of temporary rent, rather than a permanent residence. 
This is because the Thai people are not used to stay in square and limited rooms for a long time. 
However, when the problem of land and traffic increased, there would be a more permanent 
residing in condominiums; while the apartments or flats are only the lodging and rooms for rent. 
Where, usually in apartments and flats, there is neither facilities nor furniture, and tenants must 
provide these for themselves. This is the type of long renting for months or for years.
Travelers are able to find accommodations from condominiums while traveling, and these 
condominiums are called the Condotel. (The condotel is the combination of the words 
'condominium' and 'hotel'.) Here, they would be able to save money because many people may 
stay in this place and they are also able to prepare their own food.

2.4.8 Characteristics of Hotel:
The hotel compared to other establishment is having certain specific characteristic, which 
makes it distinguishable some of these are viz, a hotel is a fixed, immobile installation a 
building. It is a lodging open to public, accessible to all except to minors or unaccompanied 
children for reason of public morality. It is an enterprise which sells goods and services 
requiring payment of the price necessary to reimburse general costs and realize an adequate 
profit. Financial autonomy is a characteristic trait of hotel enterprise. In certain countries state 
loans, grants or subsidies, benefits etc., are granted to encourage hotel activity to help it 
become more profitable. It should be able to provide individual services for a person as well 
as for a family or a group. It provides uniform overall services of average or superior quality, 
rooms with or without bath, meals at various prices, thy-cleaning, laundry, sale of picture post 
cards and souvenirs tobacco and drink. 

2.4.9 Departments of Hotel: 
An attempt has been made to give bird eye view of different types of departments of hotel as 
follows. 
Table Number: 1: Departments of Hotel 
Primary Ancillary Support Services 
Rooms Guest Laundry and Valeting Marketing 
Food Guest Telephones Property Operation 
Beverages Other Guest Services Maintenance and Energy 
General Up-keep Administrations and General 
Source: S.Kannan, 2005
The Kitchen or Food Production of Hotel: 
This department caters various aspects relating to food in a hotel. To illustrate, hotels offer 
24x7 Coffee Shop to its hotel guest. 
Engineering in Hotel Industry: 
This department 24x7 deals with technical problems likely to be faced by the hotels such as 
TV or A/C and other equipment’s, if becomes out of order in that case, the maintenance staff 
looks after its immediate repairs in the hotel. 
Hotel Industry Front Desk: 
It creates long lasting impression on hotel guest and should therefore be equipped with young 
and energetic hotel staff to serve them 24x7. Their task is to make the stay of the hotel guests 
comfortable by providing required assistance such as business support services, use of 
Internet, and in few cases even safety lockers to them hotel guest. 
Hotel Industry Housekeeping:
The housekeeping is available 24x7 for hotel guest, making their Bedroom, Bathroom, clean 
and comfortable etc. They should also offer services such as viz laundry services, daily room 
cleaning services as case may be. 
Food & Beverage Service:
It delivers services to hotel guest in his or her room or at the restaurants or banquets and or in 
the conference rooms as case may be. 
Travel Desk: 
They arrange for daily travel, ticket booking, approval of ticket, and other assistance for 
exploration and shopping to the stayers of hotel which differs as per the requirement of guest. 
Health Club/ Physical fitness Centre: 
It comprises of various facilities comprising of viz., gyms, swimming pool, health club, 
beauty parlor, saloon, billiards, pool, etc. facilities for its guests. 
Space for Parking: 
In star category of hotels facilities like space for vehicle parking, space for restaurant is 
provided for the comfort of the hotel guest, so that they can get the things in hotel itself 
(www.scribd.com)6.
 
Classification of Hotels: 
An attempt has been made to provide brief idea about classification of hotels as follows: 
The hotels can be classified in many ways considering criteria such as viz, location; size of 
property; length of stay; target market; level of service, and theme respectively. 
Table Number: 2: Classification of Hotels 
Location Target market Size and 
Number 
of 
Properties 
Level of Service Length of Stay Themes 
•City 
centre/downtown 
Hotel 
•suburban Hotel 
•Motels 
•Airport Hotels 
•Resort Hotels 
•Forest Hotels 
•Floatels 
•Boatels 
•Rotels 
•commercial hotels 
•conventional hotels 
•Resort hotels 
•Suite hotels 
•B&B hotels 
•Extended-stay 
hotels 
•Casino hotels 
•Timeshares 
•Service 
apartments/corporate 
lodgings 
•small 
hotels 
• 
mediumsized 
hotels 
•Large 
hotels 
•Very 
large 
hotels 
•Mega 
hotels 
•Chain 
hotels 
•Economy/budget 
hotels 
•Midscale/midmarket 
hotels 
•Luxury hotels
•Transient 
hotels 
•Residential 
hotels/apartotels 
•Semiresidential 
hotels 
•Heritage 
Hotels 
•Ecotels 
•Boutique 
Hotels 
•Spas
Source: Raghubalari&SmriteeRaghubalan, 2010
A brief explanation on classification of hotels has been given as follows. 
Location.

City Centre:
The hotels should be preferably being located in the centre of the city near to shopping areas, 
theatres, public buildings, business centre, and rates in such hotels are high due to its location 
advantage. 

Suburban Hotels: 
These are located in the suburbs, having advantage of quieter surroundings. Rates are 
comparatively moderate to low that hotels are ideal for budget travellers. 

Motels: 
It is derived from the phrase ‘Motor Hotels’, being located primarily on highways that is 
motor ways. It offers modest lodgings to highway travellers for an overnight stay. Most motels 
provide ample parking space, and may be located near a clean fuel station. 

Airport hotels: 
Such hotels are located near to Airports. It caters to mainly transit hotel guests, who might 
have to stay over at the hotel between flights. 

Resort Hotels: 
It caters to those people who want to relax and enjoy themselves at a hill station near the 
seashore as well as to the people who are looking for a change for health reasons. Therefore, 
resort hotels may be variously called health resorts, Hill Resorts, Beach Resorts, Summer 
Resorts, Winter Resorts and so on depending on their location and positioning. Most resorts, 
particularly those in hill stations work to full capacity only during the clement seasonal 
periods, and hence undergo fluctuations in sales revenue from season to season. 
Such hotels are mostly used by vacationers for recreation and refreshments. Guests may stay 
for a week or up to even a month. The numbers vary with the season. There are peak seasons 
and off seasons. In order to boost business during the Off Season, Special Off-Season 
Packages are being offered. The atmosphere is more relaxed and laidback. 
Since resorts are usually spread out over a large area, commuting from one room or cottage 
to another, and transporting amenities takes more time and effort. The time taken to clean 
rooms for instance is longer. 

Forest Hotels:
These are located within a forest range and cater to tourists those visiting the forest area. 

Floatets:
Such hotel establishments offer luxury facilities on rivers, big lakes, and water ways seas are 
ideal spots for such hotels. In cruise ship, rooms are smaller, and all furniture rooms are 
smaller and all furniture is fixed down. 

Boatels:
A houseboat hotel is referred to as a boatel. The Shikaras of Kashmir and the Kettuvalams of 
Kerala are houseboats that offer small but luxurious accommodations to travelers in midst of 
lakes and waterways. 

Rotel: 
These are hotels found on wheels. It also comprises of big trucks wherein the inner part of 
truck is imitated like hotel rooms which is generally benefitted by a small group of travellers 
(Raghubalari & Smritee Raghubalan, 2010). 

Based on Target Market 
The classification of hotels on the basis of their target market has been described in brief as 
follows: 

Commercial Hotels:
It caters mostly to businessmen and is typically designed on the European plan, and located 
in the centre part of the city surrounding to commercial areas for increasing business. To 
illustrate, The Oberoi Towers, Mumbai. 

Convention Hotels:
These hotels consist of big convention complex and meant for those people who wishes to 
either organize or attend a Convention, Conference, or similar event as the case may be. 

Suite Hotels:
Such hotels provide rooms having a compacted kitchen having Utensils, Refrigerator, and 
Microwave Oven, as well as a Wet Bar. They have very few guest services in comparison to 
other hotels. It takes care of that guest who wishes to relocate and is away from home who 
are also frequent travelers such as viz.., Lawyers, Accountants, and Executives during a longer 
business stay. Most conventional hotels have a few rooms that can be classified as suites. 
Bed and Breakfast Hotels:
It is a European concept, Bed-and Breakfast hotels ranges from houses with a few rooms 
converted into overnight facilities to small commercial buildings with twenty to thirty 
guestrooms. 
The owner normally lives in the same premises, and is responsible for serving breakfast to 
guests that may range from a simple continental to a multi-course meal. Most of them provide 
only lodgings and limited breakfast. But, it also offers facilities such as viz., meeting rooms, 
laundry and dry-cleaning services at relatively lower prices. 

Extended-Stay Hotels: 
These hotels are like suite hotels and offer kitchen, amenities in the room which suite hotels 
do not offer. They are meant for that tourist who wishes to stay for five days or longer, and 
need few hotel services. It might not provide food, beverages, or guest laundry services. Its 
room rates are determined on the basis of the length of stay of the tourists as the case may be. 

Casino Hotels:
These are distinctive type of hotels that offers gambling facilities. It also provides guest 
rooms; Food and Beverages (F&B) and its operations are quite luxurious. It serves to leisure 
and vacation tourists. It also provides extravagant floor shows and chartered flights for hotel 
guests.

Timeshares: 
These type of hotels are also called as ‘Vacation-Interval Hotels’ and offers accommodation 
facilities to those who wishes to have it for a tenure of one or two weeks a year. Once they 
occupy the unit can also be rented out it to them by Management Company that operates the 
hotel. 

Service Apartments/Corporate Lodgings:
These are designed for those guests who wish to stay for longer periods of time up to six 
months or longer. 
It often includes viz business executives who move from one city to another as well as 
consultants on temporary assignments, corporate training programmes, and special projects 
connected with movie or sporting events. Corporate lodgings usually provide fully furnished 
apartments for guests (ibid). 

Based on Size of Property 
The capacity of a hotel in terms of the number of rooms is one of the key yardsticks for 
classifying hotels based by only size of the property (Raghubalari & SmriteeRaghubalan, 
2010)4
. 
Small Hotels: 
In Nigeria and some part of the world, hotels having 25 or less rooms are regarded as small. 
However, to the rest of the world like USA, hotels having less than 100 rooms are considered 
as small. 

Medium-Sized Hotels:
The hotels with 25 to 100 rooms may be called medium-sized in. Abroad, hotels with 100 to 
300 rooms are termed medium-sized hotels. 

Large Hotels:
Findings revealed that, hotels with 101 to 300 rooms are called large hotels whereas hotels 
with 400 to 600 rooms are termed as large hotels. 

Very Large Hotels: 
Hotels with more than 300 rooms. Abroad, hotels with 600 to 1,000 rooms may be considered 
as very large hotel. 

Mega Hotels:
Mega hotels are those which have more number of rooms that is greater than 1,000 rooms 
called as Mega Hotels. 

Chain Hotels:
These are groups that have hotels at multiple locations within and outside same location. A 
typical example of such could be found in India where there are mainly 03 hotel chains Hotels 
namely, The Taj group of hotels (Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces), The Oberoi Group (Oberoi 
Hotels & Resorts), and the ITC-Welcome Group Hotels. To illustrate, few foreign chains 
includes viz., Hyatt, Marriott, InterContinental, Le Meriden, and Sheraton who have entered 
India either through tie-ups with local partners or as self-operated properties. 

Based on Level of Service 
The hotels can be classified as per Economy, Mid-Scale, and Luxury hotels on the basis of 
the level of services it offers to hotel guests (Raghubalari & SmriteeRaghubalan, 2010). 

Budget Hotels:
Budget hotels offers the very basic requirement such as cleanliness, comfortable, and 
inexpensive properties that mainly focuses on basic needs of hotel guests by providing rooms. 
It caters primarily to budget-minded travelers who want rooms with all the amenities required 
for a comfortable stay, but without the extras they do not really need or want to pay for it. 

Mid-Scale/Mid-Market Hotels: 
These hotels offer mid-market services which is mostly meant for those who travel a lot for 
some or the other reason. Mid-Market services are modest but sufficient and the staffing level 
is moderate but not huge. A fast-growing segment in the Mid-Market category is that of suite 
hotels that offers a small living room or parlor area with a grouping of appropriate furniture 
often including a sofa bed and a small bedroom with a king-size bed. Some hotel guest suites 
include a compact kitchen, complete with Cooking Utensils, Refrigerator, Microwave Oven, 
and Wet Bar. 

Luxury Hotels:
It provides world-class services by providing expensive restaurants and lounges, beautiful 
decor, caretaker services, luxurious meeting rooms, and dining facilities. Bath linen too is 
replaced twice daily, and a nightly turndown service is usually provided. 
In addition, its guestrooms’ contain furnishings, decor, and expensive artwork. It mainly 
caters to Business Executives, Celebrities, and high-ranking political figures. Typical 
example to illustrate, The Hyatt Regency, New Delhi 

According to Length of Stay 
Such hotels are classified as viz., Transient, Residential, and Semi-Residential hotels, 
depending upon the period for which a guest wishes to stay in hotel (Raghubalari & Smritee 
Raghubalan, 2010). 

Transient Hotels: 
These are hotels where a hotel guest can register for a day or even less. They are usually 
situated near Airports and Seaports. They are usually Five-Star hotels. They may have travel 
agencies and offer car rentals. The occupancy rate is usually very high, going up to more than 
100 per cent, since each room can sometimes be sold more than once each day. 

Residential Hotels: 
These hotels that guest who normally wishes to stay for a minimum period of one month and 
up to two years, and the hotel signs a detailed lease agreement with the customer. The rent is 
paid either monthly or quarterly, but never on a daily basis. The guestrooms include a sitting 
room, a bedroom, and a kitchenette. 
They cater to clients staying away from home for long periods for various purposes. 

Semi-Residential Hotels: 
It consists of features of both transient and residential hotels respectively (ibid). 

Based on Theme 
One can divide hotels based on the theme called as viz., Heritage Hotels, Ecotels, Boutique 
Hotels, and Spas respectively. 

Heritage hotels:
Heritage Hotels are the different categories of hotels. These hotels are found in following 
varieties such as palaces, forts, or havelis, the mansions of erstwhile aristocratic families. 
Further sub-divisions of the heritage hotels category are given as follows. 

Table Number: 3: Heritage Hotels 
Category Description
Heritage It includes following such as Residences, Lodges, Forts and Palaces 
that were constructed before 1950 but after 1935. 
Classic category of 
Heritage 
It includes following such as Residences, Hunting Lodges, Castles, 
Forts and Palaces that were constructed before1935 but after 1920. 
Grand category of 
Heritage 
It includes following such as Residences, Lodges, Castles, Forts and 
Palaces constructed before 1920. 
Source: Government of India, Annual Report 2001-2002, India Tourism 
In this category of hotel, the guest can imagine to get grand welcome in the rooms allotted to 
them, as each room in this category has its own historical past, the guest is obliged with 
different varieties of food that have traditional taste, and even the necessities of internationals 
taste were also considered. The guests were also amused by traditional artistes who 
contributed in various ways and also portrayed picture of the traditional environment their life 
styles and traditional culture. An example to illustrate, Jai Mahal Palace in Jaipur.

Ecotels: 
Ecotels are environment-friendly hotels and the Environmentally Sensitive Hotels. This is so 
because no hotel can be friendly to the environment, since in one way or the other they will 
be though in a small way harming the environment; hence, the use of the term environmentally 
sensitive. Example to illustrate, The Orchid, Mumbai. 

Boutique Hotels:
The accommodation provided by boutique hotels are special in nature, as these hotels are well 
equipped, where in every room is different and fashionable from the other, in such hotels 
tailored services and facilities are provided. It is generally meant to accommodate corporate 
travelers who placed greater importance on delivery of services, maintenance of privacy and 
availability of luxury. 
Boutique hotels target customers who are in their early twenties to mid-fifties and are in the 
middle to upper income bracket. To illustrate, The Park, Bangalore. 
Spas:
The word ‘spa’, has been taken from the name of the famous mineral springs in Spa, Belgium, 
which has become a common noun denoting any place with a medicinal or mineral spring. 
The term also refers to a tub for relaxation, including a device for raising whirlpools in the 
water. A spa resort is a resort hotel that provides therapeutic baths and massages offers various 
facilities of a luxury hotel. (Raghubalari&SmriteeRaghubalan, 2010). 

Star Rating of Hotels: 
The hotel industry has adopted the star rating system which indicates the number and standard 
of facilities as provided by the hotel. 
The Hotel and Restaurant Approval Classification Committee (HRACC) with its headquarters 
in New Delhi comprises of representatives who are chosen from the Government and the 
trade. It takes on the task of rating hotels against set criteria of standards. The star 
classification of the hotels is a function of the services provided by them. But, the present star 
category classification norms in Nigeria have been so haphazard that some hotels claim to be 
six-star or seven-star, when the global norm classifies hotels as one-star at the lower end and 
five-star deluxe at the luxury end. With the entry of foreign hotel chains, the norms Nigeria 
will have to be reset to reflect the new services offered by foreign chains, which follow a 
standard set of service offerings across their properties 
Although, hotels are classified into 'Star' categories from amongst as 1-Star to 5-Star, no 
standard method of assigning these ratings and compliance with customary requirements is 
available and it is purely voluntary. 
An example illustrates, a hotel in USA with a certain rating may appear to be very different 
compared to a European or Asian hotel having uniform rating, though, it shall offer diverse 
level of amenities, range of facilities, and quality of service. Though, hotel chains promise to 
offer homogeneous standards within the same country but may not agree on the same 
standards. An example to illustrate, a 1-Star hotel provides a limited range of amenities and 
services, but adheres to a high standard of facility-wide cleanliness. A 2-Star hotel shall offer 
good accommodation and better equipped bedrooms whereas a 3-Star hotel may provide 
spacious rooms coupled with high-class decorations and furnishings. A 4-Star hotel might be 
extremely comfortable and shall provide excellent cuisine, room service, and other amenities. 
A 5-Star hotel shall keep most luxurious premises supported with widest range of guest 
services as well as swimming pool, sports and exercise facilities. 

The Official Hotel Guide published in the US, which has been accepted implemented 
worldwide has ranked hotels in nine categories viz., 
(1) Moderate Tourist Class, 
(2) Tourist Class, 
(3) Superior Tourist Class,
(4) Moderate First Class,
(5) Limited Service First Class, 
(6) First Class,
(7) Moderate Deluxe, 
(8) Deluxe, and
(9) Superior Deluxe respectively. 
2.5 Problems Identified with Building Typology

2.5.1 Entrance Lobby
The architectural aspects of the building are, of course, best observed on the approach to the front 
entrance, and the details of the site and exterior design. Among the many areas of the hotel, the 
lobby makes the single greatest impact on the guest. The main lobby is the hub of circulation, a 
place for assembly, waiting, registration and account setting and information services. Due to 
poorly located front desk in hotels, there is constant conflict within the lobby. This is a problem; 
this thesis work would seek to solve architecturally.

2.5.2 Convenience
In Resort Hotels, the conveniences of the guestrooms are usually located close to the bedroom and 
to other facilities like Restaurant, bar, conferences rooms, meeting roomy etc. The extraction of 
foul air from the convenience is a major problem that this thesis work will attempt to resolve.


2.5.3 Ventilation
Most Resort Hotels rely on artificial means of ventilation and lighting. When there is power failure 
the whole place becomes very uncomfortable for the guest, also artificial ventilation and lighting 
increase the cost of the project. The research will attempt to solve these problems by designing 
spaces and facilities that will be naturally ventilated and lighted.

2.5.4 Circulation
The problem of separating the circulation routes of the guest, services and administrative functions 
is a major problem faced by hotel design. The collection of soiled laundry materials by the inhouse staff from guest rooms creates constant conflicts between the guest and the in-house staff. 
This thesis work will attempt to proffer a solution

2.5.5 Flexibility
Flexibility is an issue to be appraised in this thesis work. Most hotels are not flexible and as such 
do not give room for expansion, when the need arises the design fails.

2.5.6 Fire
Resort hotels are usually high-rise buildings and fire safety is of topmost importance. Mixt hotels 
do PO! have escape routes especially from upper floors. This is a problem; this research work will 
attempt to solve architecturally.

2.5.7 Guest Room Design
Many people believe that the guestroom and guest bathroom create a more lasting impression on 
the lodging guest than any other single interior space. Therefore, bearing in mind that the guest 
room must reflect the needs of the lodger, the problem of providing a more residential atmosphere 
and allowing more room for other furnishings will be resolved, through defining the lodging guest, 
determining the types of guestroom beds, confirming the guestrooms dimensions, confirming the 
number and types of suites and establishing the interior space design.

2.5.8 Conceptual Approach to Design of Hotel
Resort Hotel apart £rom guests’ satisfaction, they are designed and built so that the client, owner 
or operator of the hotel will get maximum and satisfaction financial return on his investment.
For' a proper functioning, the following design principle must be emphasized. This principle 
includes: Design philosophy, hotel image, planning module, staff accommodation, services and 
structure, deliveries, kitchen and restaurant, circulation, aesthetics, adaptability to changes, hotel 
management and communication.
For a hotel to be successful, there must be a good deal of research into operational problems and 
their solutions; it also requires from the Architects great principles, subduing of his own ego, 
knowing and understanding of customer and operators’ experiences, and psychological insight into 
their motives.
The design, no matter how functionally and aesthetically conceived, will have to be molded around 
the type of the clientele and the public image of the operator.
Planning module is one of the difficulties associated with a hotel design. Apart from ducts, lift 
corridors hoists, staircases and the concentration of columns in locations where the structure 
penetrates the public wing the module must satisfy other demands
The planned and structured grids must be such that allows for flexible corridors without any 
significant change in the grid system. Often, the structural grid is determined by the width of two 
adjacent bedrooms this allows and ducts and services to pass unchecked through the floors of mid 
span construction.

2.6 Lessons Learned through Reviewed Literature
The architect must endeavor to produce an aesthetically satisfactory structure as this will be 
advertising machinery for himself. It should be in consonance with the surrounding landscape.
At the inception of any hotel design, provision should be made for possible future expansion and 
upgrading and expansion of the building and locality. Therefore, the flexibility of the design must 
be considered in order to meet up with changing taste of time. This could be achieved through 
good building material selection and proper design

REFERENCES
Buick, I (1998), A Preliminary study of the operational aspects of providing room service to 
hotel guests in Edinburgh’s principal hotels. Hospitality Management, 17(1), 49 – 64.
Callan, R. J. (1996). An appraisement of UK business travelers’ perceptions of important hotel 
attributes. Hospitality Research Journal, 19(4), 113–127.
Callan, R. J., & Bowman, L. (2000). Selecting a hotel and determining salient quality attributes:
a preliminary study of mature British travelers. International Journal of Tourism Research, 
2(2), 97–118.
Callan, R. J., & Kyndt, G. (2001). Business travelers’ perception of service quality: a prefatory 
study of two European city centre hotels. International Journal of Tourism Research, 3(4), 
313–323.
Collins, M., Parsa, H. G. (2006). Pricing strategies to maximize revenues in the lodging industry. 
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 25(1), 91–107.
Da˘gdeviren, M. (2008) A hybrid multi-criteria decision-making model for personnel selection in 
manufacturing systems. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, DOI 10.1007/s10845008-
0200-7. 
Da˘gdeviren, M., Yüksel, ˙I, & Kurt, M. (2008). A fuzzy analytic network process (ANP) model 
to identify faulty behaviors risk (FBR) in work systems. Safety Science, 34, 96–107. 
Danaher, P. J., & Mattsson, J. (1994). Cumulative encounter satisfaction in the hotel conference 
process. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 5(4), 69–81. 
Deng, H., Yeh, C. H., & Wilis, R. J. (2000). Inter-company comparison using modified TOPSIS 
with objective weights. Computers & Operations Research, 27, 963–973. 
Ertugrul, ˙I., & Karakasoglu, N. (2009). Performance evaluation of Turkish cement firms with 
fuzzy analytic hierarchy process and TOPSIS methods. Expert Systems with Applications, 
36(1), 702-715.
Fatma, P, & Timothy, N. H. (2005). Patient satisfaction in a preoperative assessment clinic: an 
analysis using SERVQUAL dimensions. Total Quality Management, 16(1), 15–30.
Grieveson Grant (1986). Hotel Companies in the U.K., Spring 1986, 6-7. Grieveson Grant, 
London.
Hsieh, L. F., & Lin, L. H. (2010). A performance evaluation model for international tourist hotels 
in Taiwan- An application of the relational network DEA. International Journal of 
Hospitality Management, 29, 14–24. 
Hsieh, L. F., Lin, L. H., & Lin, Y. Y. (2008). A service quality measurement architecture for hot 
spring hotels in Taiwan. Tourism Management, 29, 429–438. 
Hung, W. T., Shang, J. K., & Wang, F. C. (2010). Pricing determinants in the hotel industry: 
Quantile regression analysis. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 29, 378–
384.
Hwang, C. L., & Yoon, K. (1981). Multiple attribute decision making methods and applications: 
A state of the art survey. NY: Springer-Verlag.
Karsak, E. E., Sozer, S., & Alptekin, S. E. (2002). Production planning in quality function 
deployment using a. combined analytical network process and goal programming approach. 
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 44, 171–190. 
Lee, J. W., & Kim, S. H. (2000).Using analytic network process and goal programming for 
interdependent information system project selection. Computers & Operations Research, 
27, 367–382.
Lee, J. W., & Kim, S. H. (2001). An integrated approach for independent information system 
project selection. International Journal of Project Management, 19, 111–118. 
Lewis, R. C., & Shoemaker, S. (1997). Price-sensitivity measurement: a tool for the hospitality 
industry. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 38(2), 44–54. 
Lockyer, T. (2005). The perceived importance of price as one hotel selection dimension. Tourism 
Management, 26(4), 529–537. 
Mahdavinia, S, H. (2007), Customer satisfaction in four star Isfahan hotels: An Application of 
SERVQUAL model, Master thesis, Lulea university of technology, 2008: 059 – ISSN 1653 
– 0187.
Mattila, A., & O’Neill, J. (2003). Relationship between hotel room pricing, occupancy and guest 
satisfaction: a longitudinal case of a midscale hotel. Journal of Tourism and Hospitality 
Research, 27(3), 328–341.
