CHAPTER FIVE

5.0 SITE LOCATION AND ANALYSIS 
5.1 GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION - NIGERIA 
The Federal Republic of Nigeria extends between latitudes 4°16'N and 14°N and between 
longitudes 2°49'E and 14°37'E. It is surrounded by French speaking countries in the West, but for 
the Atlantic Ocean (Gulf of Guinea) in the south. The greatest distance from east to west is about 
1300 kilometers and its distance from north to south is about 1100 kilometers. Nigeria has 36 
states. 
Figure 5.1: Map of Nigeria
(Source: www.ananigeria.com/branches)

5.2.1 Historical Background of Lagos State
Lagos State was created by virtue of the State (Creation and Transitional Provisions) Decree No. 
14 of 1967 on 27 May 1967, which restructured Nigeria into 12 States. Prior to this, Lagos 
Municipality had been administered by the federal government (FG), through the Federal Ministry 
of Lagos Affairs as the regional authority, while the Lagos City Council governed the City of 
Lagos. 
The metropolitan areas (previously referred to as Colony Provinces) of Ikeja, Agege, Mushin, 
Ikorodu, Epe and Badagry were administered by the then Western Region. The State became an 
administrative entity on 11 April 1968, with Lagos Island serving the dual role of State and Federal 
Capital. 
However, in 1976, Lagos Island ceased to be the capital; Ikeja assumed that role. The seat of the 
federal government was subsequently relocated to Abuja on 12 December 1991, and Lagos also 
ceased to be Nigeria’s political capital. 
Lagos nevertheless remains Nigeria’s economic, manufacturing, financial and commercial hub, 
also ranking among Africa’s top cities along the same yardsticks. 
Figure 5.2: Map of Lagos showing Lekki
Source: https://www.google.com/imgres? mons%2F8%2F8f%2FMapa_de_Ibeju-Lekki

5.2.2 Population 
According to the 2006 census conducted by the National Population Commission (NPC), Lagos 
has a population of over nine million, of a national estimate of 150 million. 
The population growth has a rate of about 600,000 per annum, with a density of approximately 
4,193 persons per sq. km. In the urban areas of the Lagos metropolis, the average population 
density is over 20,000 people per sq. km. 
Current demographic trend analysis reveals that Lagos’ population growth rate of 8% has resulted 
in its harboring 36.8% (an estimated 49.8 million) of Nigeria’s 150 million urban population 
(World Bank, 1996). 
The implication is that whereas Nigeria’s population growth is approximately 4-5% and stands 
globally at 2%, Lagos’ population is growing ten times faster than that of New York and Los 
Angeles (USA), with grave implications for urban sustainability.
Figure 5.3: Estimated Population
Source: Nigerian Bureau of Statistics (NBS), Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN)

5.3 Site Analysis
5.3.1 Topography
The land surface is generally smooth and flat which is good for any kinds of development. 
Below is the Elevation map of Lekki, Nigeria, which displays range of elevation with different 
colors.
The elevation map of Lekki, Nigeria is generated using elevation data from NASA's 90m
resolution SRTM data. 
The maps also provide idea of topography and contour of Lekki, Nigeria.
Figure 5.3 Lekki, Nigeria Elevation Map
Source: http://www.floodmap.net/Elevation/ElevationMap/?gi=2332121

5.3.2 Temperature
Temperature, which is the measure of hotness or coldness expressed in terms of any of several 
arbitrary scales and indicating the direction in which heat energy will spontaneously flow—i.e., 
from a hotter body (one at a higher temperature) to a colder body (one at a lower temperature)
It’s about 28’c in the mornings, 32’c in the afternoons and 27’c in the evenings.
Figure 5.4: Lekki Weather by Month // Weather Averages
Source: https://en.climate-data.org/africa/nigeria/ondo/lekki-372929/

5.3.3 Precipitation
Precipitation, all liquid and solid water particles that fall from clouds and reach the ground. These 
particles include drizzle, rain, snow, snow pellets, ice crystals, and hail.
The essential difference between a precipitation particle and a cloud particle is one of size. An 
average raindrop has a mass equivalent to about one million cloud droplets. Because of their large 
size, precipitation particles have significant falling speeds and are able to survive the fall from the 
cloud to the ground.
The transition from a cloud containing only cloud droplets to one containing a mixture of cloud 
droplets and precipitation particles involves two basically different steps: 
the formation of incipient precipitation elements directly from the vapor state and the subsequent 
growth of those elements through aggregation and collision with cloud droplets. The initial 
precipitation elements may be either ice crystals or chemical-solution droplets.
Here, precipitation is about 23% in the mornings, 53-57% in the afternoons and 7-9% in the 
evenings.

5.3.4 Wind Speed
Wind speeds which is the movement of air in the outer environment, but also, the speed of air 
movement inside a space is also as important in many cases, including weather 
forecasting, aircraft and maritime operations, construction and civil engineering. High wind 
speeds can cause unpleasant side effects, and strong winds often have special names, 
including gales, hurricanes, and typhoons. The highest wind speed ever measured on earth, 
231 miles per hour, was recorded on Mount Washington (New Hampshire).
Here in Lekki, It’s about 8km/h in the mornings, 14km/h in the afternoons and 11km/h in the 
evenings.
5.3.5 Rainfall
It’s a high humid area with lot of green around which through natural process attracts a lot of 
rainfall. The Monsoon winds from the Atlantic creates seven months of heavy tropical rains which 
occur between April and October which are then followed by five months of dryness (November 
- March).

5.3.6 Climate.
The climate is the humid tropical climate due to its close proximity to the lagoon but not so 
different from the average temperature of Lagos. There is presence of heavy rainfall and a mean 
temperature all year round of over 29° c/84.2° c in the hot season. Wind speeds in the area are 
generally low but may reach 16.1km/h.
Figure 5.5: Climate Graph
Source: https://en.climate-data.org/africa/nigeria/ondo/lekki-372929/
Figure 5.6: Site Analysis

5.3.7 Site Merits
1. The site is airy and air flow is good 
2. The site is an open space which provides us a good place for development 
3. The topography of the site is smooth and flat which is good for any kinds of development. 
4. The soil mixture is nutritious and suitable for planting trees and vegetation 
5. The site gets enough amount of sunlight and rainfall every day. 
6. The site is near to new airport, new seaport, and new lekki city areas. 
7. Fit into the master plan of the zone. 
8. Enough land for future development.

Site Demerits
1. There is likely to be air pollution in the area due to high number industry proposed for the 
area. 
2. High intensity of sunlight during afternoon as the site is an open space. 
3. Drenched in rain as the site is not covered 
4. The number of visitors or Tourist daily may be too high and increase per time. 
5. There might be traffic problem as there are a lot of development for the area. 
6. The commercial area is far from the site.
7. Design consideration
Figure 5.7: Lekki Free Trade Zone Master Plan

5.3.8 Site Description
Size: The proposed site area is approximately 300acres (30sqkm)
Geometry: The proposed site doesn’t have a definite shape.
Soil type: Sandy soil type with a relatively low bearing capacity. 
Land use: The site is partially surrounded by lekki lagoon and vegetation which is a site for 
proposed residential structures.
Vegetation type: It consists of traces of green and scrubs. Presence of every green and deciduous 
trees. Relating to the survey carried out, there is a higher level of built-up area than vegetation 
presence.

5.3.9 Site Justification
Lekki Free Zone Features
In addition to incentives, the following factors account for why Lekki Free Zone is preferred;
➢ Unique Location
▪ Easy access to the neighbouring countries in West Africa and central Africa.
▪ within the easy reach of European and American market.
➢ Provision of Infrastructure
▪ Good road networks
▪ 12 MW of power
▪ Water supply of about 9000m3/day
▪ Security system
▪ The new Lekki International Airport
▪ The new Lekki deep sea port
➢ Regional Characteristics 
▪ 50Km from Lagos city centre
▪ 70 Km from the Murtala Mohammed Int’l Airport
▪ 50 Km from Apapa port, West Africa's largest harbour. 
▪ will be linked by rail and road network to all the commercial states of Nigeria and 
neighbouring countries. 
The zone will be divided into three functional districts; the residential district in the North, 
industrial district in the Middle and commercial trading/warehousing and logistics district in the 
South-East.
LFTZ is divided into three functional districts; the residential district in the north, industrial district 
in the middle and commercial trading/warehousing & logistics district in the southeast.
Lekki free trade zone attracts N170bn investment due to the plans for a cargo airport structure, and 
the seaport which will be coming up in the nearest future and which will also involve lots of 
foreigner investors and contractors who will need a place to pass the night. Therefore, I am 
designing a hotel.
Also, the hotel will be LOCATED WHERE IN CONTACT WITH NATURE.
Figure 5.8: Lekki Free Trade Zone Entrance

5.4 Design Consideration
5.4.1 Proper Planning
Balance of functional, layout, and aesthetic issues to develop a property that simultaneously meets 
the needs of the guests, the staff, and the owner. In general, fivestar properties have public areas 
that are heavily design oriented, with the functional aspects carefully integrated to enhance, yet 
not dominate the space. However, budget properties tend to favor function and layout over design, 
for maximum utility. Regardless of how the spaces are configured, the developer must consider 
and balance many conflicting needs before a design is ready for the contractor's hand. The best 
examples provide properties that inspire; are safe, efficient, and cost effective; and that maintain 
their utility and charm through time.

5.4.2 Ventilation
Ventilation moves outdoor air into a building or a room, and distributes the air within the building 
or room. The general purpose of ventilation in buildings is to provide healthy air for breathing by 
both diluting the pollutants originating in the building and removing the pollutants from it
Hotel ventilation should be regarded as part of an integral hotel energy solution. The requirements 
of individual rooms must be carefully examined – reception, kitchen, dining room, swimming pool 
and hotel rooms – and the ventilation, heating and cooling requirements of the hotel precisely 
dimensioned. 
 
5.4.3 Circulation 
In architecture, circulation refers to the movement of people 
and goods into, through and around buildings or facilities. Hence, circulation design is a critical 
aspect of planning of hotel buildings and associated facilities. 
There are majorly two types of circulation identified in the literature. These are 
external circulation and internal circulation
My design must accommodate a full traffic circulation both in and out.

5.5 Design Concept
Synergy
Synergizing Tranquillity with Architecture
The noun tranquillity means "a state of peace and quiet," like the tranquillity you feel at the shore 
of a quiet lake or inside a beautiful cathedral. If you are driven by fear, anger or pride nature will 
force you to compete, if you are guided by courage, awareness, tranquillity and peace nature will 
serve you.
Talent develops in tranquillity, character in the full current of human life.”
“A happy life consists in tranquillity of mind.
➢ Contentment
➢ Solitude
➢ Serenity 
➢ Inner Peace
➢ Unruffled
➢ Peace of Mind
➢ Calmness
➢ Untroubled etc…

5.6.1 Recommendations
The study identifies 
− Organizing building mass, orientation and outdoor spaces to provide efficient access and 
− service. 
− The use of greens and water body for proper landscape aesthetics.
− The use of balconies, verandas, and shade devices like horizontal overhang and vertical fin 
walls. 
− The use of adequate lighting materials to brighten up the place.
− Use of permeable (or porous) pavement systems in lieu of impervious asphalt or concrete. 
− The use and development of glass and transparent materials. 
− Preserve open space area adjacent to the building. These spaces should be filled with 
greenery and water bodies to cool the environment and beautify the environment. 
− Complement the building with site features that minimize negative environmental impacts 
and restore natural systems. 
− The use of renewable and recyclable materials. 