CHAPTER THREE
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

LIGHTING AND AESTHETICS

3.1 Natural Lighting
A vital aspect of guest comfort in hotel rooms is the control of solar rays. The function rooms and 
other public areas are also to be effectively shaded from harsh solar conditions. Some control is 
given a special study due to the peculiar situation of the project site in relation to the environment. 
The site alignment is such that the buildings long elevations shall lie in East-West orientation since 
the front shall face the expressway. This orientation is desirable to achieve thermal comfort. 
Daylighting is the practice of bringing light into a building interior and distributing it in a way that 
provides more desirable and better-quality illumination than artificial light sources. (SBTM, 1996) 
According to the Passive Design Best Practices (2008), it maximizes the use and distribution of 
natural diffused daylight throughout a building ‘s interior to reduce the need for artificial electric 
lighting. Careful design is required to avoid overheating and to minimize glare, and to complement 
passive heating and cooling strategies such as shading. In order to maximize energy savings, 
advanced electrical control systems like sensors should be integrated. 
To fully daylight most spaces, there are various approaches one could utilize on internal and 
external walls. These could be combined with each other or repeated as a pattern across the space. 
For example, Wall Wash Top-lighting on an interior wall could be combined with High Clerestory 
Side-lighting and View Windows on an exterior wall to fully daylight a space. Since daylight is 
additive, the total amount of daylight in the space is the sum of the daylight available from each 
individual pattern. Each guideline represents a daylight delivery system with inherent advantages 
and disadvantages, which are summarized below in the Table below:

Design Criteria View 
Windows
High 
Sidelight 
w/Light Shelf
Wall Wash 
Toplighting
Central & 
Patterned 
Toplighting
Linear 
Toplighting
Uniform Light 
Distribution 
Low Glare 
Reduced 
Energy Costs 
Cost 
Effectiveness 
Safety/Security 
Concerns 
Low 
Maintenance 
Table 3.1 Selection Criteria for Daylighting Strategies Source: National Best Practices Manual for 
Building 
Extremely good application
Good application
Poor application 
Extremely poor application
Depends on space layout and number and distribution of daylight apertures 
Mixed benefits 
To achieve natural daylighting in buildings, the following guidelines are necessary: 

3.1.1 Optimize use of daylight 
i. Configure the fenestration system to achieve a high daylight factor. 
ii. Consider glare-protection strategies that minimize the time when interior shading 
devices must be drawn. 
iii. Orient windows for regularly occupied spaces to create views and to visually connect 
indoors and outdoors. 

3.1.2 Orient building to optimize daylight. 
Create an elongated massing allowing for daylighting using north-facing and south-facing 
glass. An east-west elongated building with an appropriate overhang will permit effective 
daylighting while increasing winter solar gain through south glass and reducing the direct 
penetration of summer sun. 
Avoid exposed, east-facing and west-facing glass because of the large variation in light levels 
throughout the day and greater solar gains in the warmer months, resulting in increased cooling 
requirements. Eastern exposures are less problematic than the western ones in terms of heating 
and cooling costs. 
Consider north-facing glazing for occupants requiring more uniform levels of diffuse daylight. 

3.2 Relationship between Lighting and Hotel Design
Figure 3.1: North versus south windows: South windows are shaded from direct sunbut receive daylight reflected off concrete walk and white painted overhangs. North 
windows are large and unshaded. 

3.2.1 Form to guide daylight. 
Incorporate daylight-enhancing techniques to bring light into interior spaces. o Evaluate such 
design elements to ensure that they do not add to building heating and cooling loads. o Place 
and size glazing apertures appropriately. Maximize daylight through location and size of 
windows, roof monitors and skylights and through use of glazing systems and shading devices 
appropriate to building orientation and space use. 
Design to avoid glare by using top lighting such as monitors in the roof or ceiling plane that 
allow a greater quantity and more even distribution of daylight within spaces. Flat, bubble and 
low-slope skylights have a negative heat balance, but provide glare-free light with lightdeflecting devices installed underneath them. 
Consider high clerestory windows (often preferable to skylights) to provide deep daylight 
penetration, especially for spaces needing useable wall space. o Consider the use of interior 
and/or exterior light shelves, especially on south-facing windows and appropriate east or west 
facades, for deeper daylight penetration. 
Provide exterior shading devices (overhangs, fins, projecting light shelves, etc.) where solar 
gain and direct light are undesirable. 
a.) b.) 
 
Figure 3.2: View window, b.) Clerestory window 
Figure 3.3: View windows and clerestory window combination provide a more uniform distribution of 
daylight across the space 
Figure 3.4: Exterior lightshelves reflecting sunlight onto ceilings. 
Figure 3.5: Deeply coffered ceiling helps to diffuse light from four skylights. There are no electric lights 
on in this photo 

3.1.3 Provide daylighting controls. 
Design appropriate daylight harvesting controls. Review alternatives for reducing electric 
lighting use through daylight harvesting. Continuous daylight dimming has broad occupant 
acceptance, especially if, in individual spaces, it is coupled with a manual dimmer that allows 
for adjustment for maximum intensity of the artificial light from lamps. On/off or three-stage 
controls are appropriate for spaces with transitory occupancy (e.g., corridors) and where the 
glazed areas are large so that the change from one light level to another rarely occurs. 
Figure 3.6: Horizontal blinds allow control of brightness from lower view windows. 
Note that high clerestory windows have no blinds so that daylight can reach deep into 
spaces. 
Figure 3.7: Shading angles for a south elevation 
Source: Los Alamos National Laboratory Sustainable Design Guide 
Figure 3.8 : Horizontal and vertical shading ratios. This figure lists the appropriate x/y ratios for 
completely shading a south-facing window for various months at two different time ranges. Use the 
lower portion of this figure to determine the appropriate azimuth angle for shading an east- or westfacing window at various dates and times 
Source: Los Alamos National Laboratory Sustainable Design Guide 
Figure 3.9: Effects of internal and external shading Source: Passive Design Guide 
Best Practices
a.) b.) 
Figure 3.10: Sawtooth Roof, b.) Roof Monitor 
Source: Sustainable Building Technical Manual 
Figure 3.11: Skylit wall wash delivers daylight across two-thirds of this classroom. 
Source: National Best Practices Manual for Building High Performance Schools 
Figure 3.12 : Sawtooth monitor with baffers. 

3.3 Architectural Solution and Strategies to Design Solution
3.3.1 Passive Cooling and Ventilation
The architectural solutions have been discussed under the framework of using passive 
strategies to control and maintain climate elements in the building
Passive or natural ventilation strategies use naturally occurring air flow patterns around and in 
a building to introduce outdoor air into the space. Passive ventilation must be considered 
during the design process because many architectural features affect air flows through a 
building, including the building shape, layout of interior walls, floors and even furniture. 
Design features must strike a balance between privacy/noise attenuation needs and the desired 
path of least resistance for air distribution. Hence the following design measures should be 
considered ideal: 
Consider natural ventilation strategies in design of exterior window and wall openings to 
reduce reliance on mechanical ventilation at least during swing seasons. o Consider low and 
high pressure zones to drive natural ventilation across buildings. Ventilation rates will also 
be affected by prevailing wind direction. 
Figure 3.13: Distribution of wind pressure around a building 
Design for cross ventilation. 
Figure 3.14 : Cross ventilation Source: Passive design toolkit 
Use stack effect for cooling through high vent reliefs on stairwells and other high outlets where 
smoke evacuation will not be compromised. 
Figure3.15: Stack ventilation Source: Passive design toolkit
Consider pressure and suction across the building envelope in achieving natural ventilation and
infiltration
Figure3.16: Wind pressure, suction and wind flow around buildings 
Source: Busato 2003 
Consider the shape and orientation of the building relative to the direction of the wind which 
are both directly related to the way in which the airflow behaves around volumes 
Figure3.17: Wind flow and shadow effect between buildings 
Source: Busato 2003 
Consider the effect positive effects of effective vegetation on wind pattern. 
Figure3.18: Effects of vegetation on wind pattern 
Source: Busato 2003 
Consider the shape and configuration of the opening which also have an effect on the internal wind 
speeds. 5
Figure3.19: Average internal velocity, percentage of the outside as a factor of the 
inlet/outlet ratio and wind direction 
Source: Busato 2003 
Consider the use of intermediate openings. The internal air distribution is mostly determined 
by the total area of the openings in the walls with the smallest area of openings. This may be 
an important consideration in the planning of multi zone spaces such as auditoriums 
Figure3.20: Effects of opening location and size in adjacent walls 
Source: Busato 2003 
Plan the introduction of ventilation openings which can also be placed in the roof or above in 
the form of clerestory windows, ridge projections or wind catchers. The best position for 
clerestory openings acting as inlets is in the upwind section of the roof and in the downwind 
for exhausts. 
Figure3.21: Effects of clerestory on average internal airflow rates 
Source: Busato 2003 
Carefully balance the deficits of operable windows, which may compromise the efficiency and 
maintenance of central systems, with the psychological benefits of operable windows, e.g., 
operable windows in offices but not labs. 
Consider fan-powered night ventilation in lieu of operable windows. Night ventilation must be 
enthalpy-controlled to avoid introducing excessive humidity in the building. 
Design for maximum benefit from economizer cooling in mechanical systems. 

3.3.2 Electricity and Lighting: 
The nature of hotels makes it imperative that electricity and electrical fittings have to be given 
special attention. Particular consideration must be given to the effects achieved with lighting in 
bedrooms, function rooms, kitchens and cloaks of particular importance is the positioning of 
outlets. 
There should be at least one socket outlets by each bed. Possibly incorporated with the lighting 
control panel, so that guests may use any portable appliances they may bring. Other sockets are 
desirable for cleaning and for portable lamps. In the bathrooms, razor sockets are necessary and in 
the corridors, a reasonable number is needed for cleaning. 
Socket outlets are also essential in kitchens and function rooms. These are provided with an aim 
of making it possible for use of any electrical appliances as might be needed in these places. 
In addition to the public power supply, provision is to be made for a standby power generating 
machine, as the public power supply in Nigeria is not reliable. 

3.3.3 Heating, Cooling, Ventilation and Air Conditioning: 
There are four basic elements about which decision need to be taken in the design of a central 
thermal installation. First the basic energy supply, second, the central plant which converts the 
energy into positive or negative heat, third, the heat transfer medium and distribution system which 
conveys this potential heat to the individual spaces within the building fourth, it is transformed 
useful heat and supplied at the correct rate for the particular room or space by terminal units. 
Basic energy supply is usually oil, though electricity, gas or solid fuel may be employed, 
depending on the nature of the plant. Guests are supposed to also have some degree of individual 
control over the micro-climatic conditions in their rooms. 

3.3.4 Heating: 
We do not have much problem in the heating of interiors here in the tropics. Therefore, heating in 
hotels here refers to the space and location for boilers and hot water storage. Attention is given to 
the noise and heat from boiler rooms, relation to fuel storage, accessibility for maintenance 
(Dutton, 2005).

3.4 AESTHETICS
The sensory perception and understanding of sensuous knowledge of designs. According to 
Baumgarten (2003), a design and a philosopher of aesthetics picked up this term and changed its 
meaning to gratification of the senses or subconscious delight. That is work of design that is 
produced to gratify our senses. The concept has since been applied to any aspect of the experiences 
of art, such as aesthetic judgment, aesthetic attitude, aesthetic understanding, aesthetic emotion 
and aesthetic value in Industrial design. All are part of the aesthetic sensibility in hotel design and 
they are mostly used in arts especially visual designs and visual arts. As a result, aesthetic 
sensibility in hotel designing philosophically and psychologically deals with the quality of a design 
work, the physical appearance, its pleasing nature and the unity of forms and appearance of each 
aspect of the design against other aspect that evoke emotional response (Kenneth, 2013).
Adelabu and Yamanaka (2014), opined that aesthetics fills an important role in the evolutionary 
trend of design as the design of objects in turn has taken a key position in shaping culture and 
contemporary education and impacting lives in far-reaching ways. As designer according to 
Adelabu et al, one need to get more aware of the emotive powers of design and that as the aesthetic 
quality of products are increasing, these become a pervasive factor in the design process and a 
promise that must be kept towards the user’s satisfaction (Qinping, 2006).
The term or concept “aesthetic sensibility of contemporary hotel design” hinges on man’s 
awareness of beauty and fashion product that harmonizes with man’s consciousness of beauty. It 
employs technological advancement material properties, existing tools and implements to better 
the condition of human living, that it entails human psychology and the principles of economics 
which cannot be disassociated in human choice of dynamics making in hotel design (Anders, 
2009). The theory aesthetic is deemed important to designers because it is a branch of philosophy 
associated with art and beauty (Zhang, 2009) which is concerned with how individual perceives 
objects or make judgment based upon information received as five sensory inputs. It is this 
perception and affective emotional connection that make aesthetic concern much more important 
and act as the bridge between designs and designers. (Carlson, 2003).

3.5 RELATED AREA OF DESIGN EMPHASIS 
Other appropriated related issues have been discussed as follows:

3.5.1 General Planning Principles & Design Considerations 
The design principles and considerations discussed here are organized to highlight green building 
strategies to be applied in the tropics in a hotel design. For the purpose of this study, the challenges 
of hot humid climate should be seriously considered. With that in mind, alongside with the typical 
green building strategies, the ones considered to be of greater importance are those concerning 
thermal comfort, natural ventilation and daylighting. Applying these guidelines will result in a 
hotel that is healthy, comfortable, resource efficient, water efficient, safe, and adaptable.
 
3.5.2 Circulation 
Arrangements for vertical circulation (stairs, elevators, and engineering services) often determines 
the floor plans of multi-story hotels. Some rules and regulations guide the provision and 
installation of circulation and communication services in hotels. Shafts and stair-wells extending 
through the building for instance, must be enclosed and protected to avoid the risk of fire spreading 
from floor to floor. This is most economically and advantageously done by grouping vertical 
circulation and services together within the structural core. 
Fire safety requirements influence the positions of circulation and services cores and also limit the 
travel distance from any guest room or apartment to this protected exit. Maximum travel distance 
depends on many factors, amongst which are height of building and combustibility of its frame or 
panels, the availability of alternative routes of escape and the installation of automatic water 
sprinklers. 
Apart from short end corridors, it is necessary to provide at least alternative stair cases and 
secondary stairs for housekeeping and room service circulation. 
Provision of elevators is necessary for all hotels over three storeys. These elevators are necessary 
and fundamentally put in same area with main staircase for the following reasons: -
More efficient elevator service, interchange and control 
The staircase provides an obvious alternative in emergency Structural design, equipment 
installation and maintenance are simplified. 
The circulation/service core can be used as a structural support or stiffening for the 
building. 

Typical installations and speeds for lifts 
Typical installation of hotels Speeds 
4-8 storeys 1.25m/s 
8-12 storeys 1.75m/s 
12-16 storeys 2.40m/s 
Table 3.1 Capacities: 1100 – 1600kg 0r 16-22 persons. 
Source: Fred Lawson (1976, p.131) 
For circulation around the site, vehicular path should be well separated from pedestrian path. The 
road pattern should be cohesive. 
According to Richard and Robert (1997) refining the roadway involves three activities 
i. Shortening each road to reduce its impact on individual units and clusters, and to reduce 
costs.
ii. Organizing parking to relate most directly to each unit without compromising 
environmental quality.
iii. Designing the road to assure buffering and integration with the other plan elements. 

REFERENCES
Meade, L. M., & Presley, A. (2002). R&D project selection using the analytic network process. 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 49, 59–66. 
Meade, L. M., & Sarkis, J. (1998). Strategic analysis of logistics and supply chain management 
systems using the analytical network process. Transportation research Part E: Logistics 
and Transportation Review, 34, 201–215. 
Meade, L. M., & Sarkis, J. (1999). Analyzing organizational project alternatives for agile 
manufacturing processes: An analytical network approach. International Journal of 
Production Research, 37, 241–261. 
Min, H., Min, H., & Chung, K. (2002). Dynamic benchmarking of hotel service quality. Journal 
of Services Marketing, 16(4), 302–322.
Ministry of Islamic guidance, Research and center of tourism (2008), "Investigation on hoteling 
industry in Iran", 2008.
Ministry of Islamic guidance, Research and study center of tourism (2006), "Investigation on 
hoteling industry in Iran", 2006.
Ngai, E. W. T., & Wat, F. K. T. (2003). Design and development of a fuzzy expert system for 
hotel selection. Omega, 31, 275 – 286. 
Oh, H. (2003). Price fairness and its asymmetric effects on overall price, quality, and valued 
judgments: the case of an upscale hotel. Tourism Management, 24, 387–399. 
Onüt, S., & Soner, S. (2008). Transshipment site selection using the AHP and TOPSIS 
approaches under fuzzy environment. Waste Management, 28(9), 1552-1559.
Partovi, F. Y., & Corredoira, R. A. (2002). Quality function deployment for the good of soccer. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 137, 642–656.
Raymond, K. S., & Chu, T. C. (2000). An importance-performance analysis of hotel selection 
factors in the Hong Kong hotel industry: a comparison of business and leisure travelers. 
Tourism Management, 21, 363-377. 
Renner, P. F. (1994). Basic hotel front office procedures. NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Saaty, T. L. (1996). Decision making with dependence and feedback: The analytic network 
process. Pittsburgh: RWS Publications.
Saaty, T. L., & Takizawa, M. (1986). Dependence and independence from linear hierarchies to 
nonlinear Networks. European Journal of Operational Research, 26, 229–237. 
Shipley, M. F., Korvin, D. K., & Obit, R. (1991). A decision making model for multi-attribute 
problems incorporating uncertainty and bias measures. Computers & Operations Research, 
18, 335–342. 
Shyur, H. J. (2006). COTS evaluation using modified TOPSIS and ANP. Applied Mathematics 
and Computation, 177, 251–259. 
Shyur, H. J., & Shih, H. S. (2006). A hybrid MCDM model for strategic vendor selection. 
Mathematical and Computer Modeling, 44, 749–761. 
Soriano, D. R. (1999). Total quality management: Applying the European model to Spain’s 
urban hotels. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 40(1), 54–59.
Stutts, A. T. (2001). Hotel and lodging management. NJ: JohnWiley & Sons, Inc.
Tsou, C. H. (2008). Multi-objective inventory planning using MOPSO and TOPSIS. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 35(1-2), 136-142.
Urtasun, A., & Gutierrez, I. (2006), Hotel location in tourism cities Madrid 1936–1998, Annals 
of Tourism Research, 33(2), 382–402.
Voss, G., Parasuraman, A., & Grewal, D. (1998). The role of price and quality perceptions in 
repurchase and post purchase evaluation of services. Journal of Marketing 62(4), 46– 61.
Wang, F. C., Hung, W. T., Shang, J. K. (2006a). Measuring the cost efficiency of international 
tourist hotels in Taiwan. Tourism Economics, 12(1), 65–85.
Wang, F. C., Shang, J. K., Hung, W. T. (2006b). Productivity and service quality changes 
in international hotels in Taiwan. Annals of Tourism Research, 33(2), 571–574.
Wang, Y. J. (2007). Applying FMCDM to evaluate financial performance of domestic 
airlines in Taiwan. Expert Systems with Applications, 34(3), 1837-1845.
Wang, Y. M., & Elhag, T. M. S. (2006). Fuzzy TOPSIS method based on alpha level sets 
with an application to bridge risk assessment. Expert Systems with Applications, 31, 
309–319. 
Wilkins, Merrilees, B., & Herington, C. (2007). Towards an understanding of total service 
quality in hotels, Hospitality Management, 26(4), 840–853. 
Yüksel, ˙I, & Da˘gdeviren, M. (2007). Using the analytic network process (ANP) in a 
SWOT analysis-A case study for a textile firm. Information Sciences, 177, 3364–3382.
Yuksel, E., Popi, P., & Cihan, C. (2003). Service quality in Cretan accommodations: 
Marketing strategies for the UK holiday market. International Journal of Hospitality 
Management, 22(1), 47–66