CHAPTER FOUR
4.0 Case Studies 

Hotel design is actually a delicate, intricate but exciting undertaking. It is therefore a very 
expedient undertaking requiring a thorough study and research on already existing five star hotels 
determining the extent to which green building strategies have been applied. The aim of these case 
studies is to acquire an understanding of the standards and quality of services and other ancil1ary 
facilities, how they should operate and relate, hence gaining adequate experience on the basic 
principles of a five star Hotel design. 
Source of Information: Visit to the hotel, internet, interviews, photographs taken and sketches. 

4.1 Outline of Cases Studied
➢ Nicon Hilton (Transcorp) Hotel, Abuja
➢ SHERATON (HYATT REGENCY) HOTEL, ABUJA
➢ W Barcelona Hotel, Spain

4.2 Nicon Hilton (Transcorp) Hotel, Abuja 
Brief: The hotel was a joint venture, whose principal partners are the National Insurance 
Corporation of Nigeria (NICON), the Hilton International and some other corporate bodies but has 
being acquired by Transcorp PIc. 
Architect: A Gaillard, D. Hamou, and H.J. Stampfli with J. Metzger and P. Aklin Management 
Firm: The Hilton International 
Location: The site is located in the central area of the Federal Capital Territory precisely the Wuse 
district. It is estimated to be less than one kilometer from the ministry and embassy sites. 
Duration: The project started in 1982 and was completed in 1986, but was formally opened in 
April, 1987.
Building Performance and Description:
The structure composition is a combination of concrete and steel frames with the horizontal and 
vertical members of reinforced concrete made with props. The hotel is a 10 story (Y-Plan) ultramodem structure. It is of international standard with guest suites richly and lavishly furnished.
The landscape of the hotel environment creates this feeling of being at home with nature. The 
beautiful landscape gives a warm reception to guests and takes them from the entrance gate through 
the congress hall to the porte-cochere behind.

Facilities Available: 
The available spaces and facilities in Abuja Transcorp Hotel are as follows: 797 Rooms
337 Standard Twins 
60 Alcove Twins 
16 Studios 
60 Junior Suites 
80 Royal Rooms (bridal Suites) 
30. Presidential Suites A 
8 Executive Suites 
20 Presidential Suites B 
3 Restaurants 
Zuma Grill 
Bukka Restaurant 
Oriental Restaurant 
3 bars 
Grill Bar 
Car Rental 
DHL Courier Services 
2 Banks 
19 Meeting Rooms 
Business Centre 
Conference Centre 
Cocktail Bar 
Pool Snack Bar 
Gift Shops 
Laundry and Valet Services 
Safety Deposit Boxes 
Mail and Postage Facilities 
Swimming Pools - Adult and Children’s Pool 
Sauna 
Fitness Centre and Gymnasium 
Squash Centre 
Tennis Courts 
Casino Mint Golf 
Night Club 
Volley Ball 
Basket Ball 
Facsimile, Telex, Telephone, etc 
(Source:http://www.hilton.com!en/hi/hotels/floorplans.jhtml?ctyhocn=ABUHIT 
W&floor=2&tab=) 3rd September, 2011.
Figure 4.1: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Properly Landscaped Dual Carriage Entrance
(Source: Author)
Figure 4.2: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Arial View
(Source: Modified from google earth)
Figure 4.3: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Ground Floor Level 
(Source:http://www.hilton.com!en/hi/hotels/floorplans.jhtml?ctyhocn=ABUHIT 
W&floor=2&tab=) 3rd September, 2011.
Figure 4.4: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Second Ground Floor Level 
(Source:http://www.hilton.com!en/hi/hotels/floorplans.jhtml?ctyhocn=ABUHIT 
W&floor=2&tab=) 3rd September, 2011.
Figure 4.5: NICON HILTON ABUJA-Mezzanine Level
(Source:http://www.hilton.com!en/hi/hotels/floorplans.jhtml?ctyhocn=ABUHIT 
W&floor=2&tab=) 3rd September, 2011.
Figure4.6: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Main Entrance and Drop-Off with External façade
Figure4.7: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Service Road and “Back of House”
Figure 4.8: NICON HILTON ABUJA- Conference Hall kicked off the Tower for Structural 
Purposes.
Figure 4.9: NICON HILTON ABUJA-Piano Lounge Very Spacious with few column distracted 
view.
Figure 4.10: NICON HILTON ABUJA-King Deluxe Suite ventilated only one side
Figure 4.11: NICON HILTON ABUJA - Leisure Pool.

4.2.1 Appraisal: 
Merits: 
- The Architectural statement of the hotel is direct; the form has been handled to give the building 
its own special character and appeal. 
- The combination of steel frames with concrete gives the building a strong and impressive 
character. 
- The hotel site is properly landscaped with guest relaxation and recreational facilities and 
extensive parking spaces properly zoned. 
- The interior is lavishly furnished to the highest taste and is indeed welcoming and classy. - 
The hotel scale justifies the choice of form in keeping with the 12 storey height limit of 
Abuja. 
- Disabled guests were considered by providing prominent ramps and specially designed rooms 
for them. 
- The guest rooms are tastefully furnished. 
- The hotel has three restaurants; hence the guest may choose to dine in relaxed informality (Bukka 
restaurants), continental especially (oriental restaurant) or elegant luxury (Zuma Grill).
Demerits 
- The site of the hotel is too brisk and inhumane for the casual guest and does not allow for 
people on vacation and tourists to enjoy their stay. 
- The hotel rooms have no balcony, thus making it impossible for the guest to have a semiphysical contact with the immediate landscape and environment. 
- There is no direct link between the administration and the service areas. There is no direct link 
between the service areas and the public areas without going through the kitchen. 
- The fire escapes in the guest room wings are not adequate. 
- Guest rooms have long double loaded corridors which are not cross ventilated. 
- The hotel depends so much on mechanical system of lighting and ventilation (it is too synthetic), 
therefore its green building rating is not commendable. 
Conclusion: The Transcorp Hilton Hotel, Abuja can truly compete effectively with other topechelon hotels of the world as an international class hotel. 
The combination of the steel frame with concrete gives an impressive facade. Architecturally, it 
speaks of Strength and Stability. 

4.3 SHERATON (HYATT REGENCY) HOTEL, ABUJA 
Architects: Lanre Towry Coker Associates, Lagos. 

4.3.1 Brief History: 
This hotel was initially the Hyatt Regency Hotel, Abuja and was managed by Hyatt Hotel 
Managers International for the owners, capital Hotels. As a result of disagreement between both 
parties, the hotel manager had to quit, then, Sheraton hotel managers were invited to manage the 
hotel, thereby changing the name to Abuja Sheraton. However, the hotel was constructed between 
1985 and 1989. It was used in May, I989, for the African Development Bank 
(ABD) Conferences in Abuja but was officially opened on the 15th of January, 1990.

4.3.2 Location: 
The Abuja Sharon Hotel is situated on Ladi Kwadi Way, approximately 39 kilometers (24 miles) 
from Abuja International Airport. This implies that it was located on the heart of the newly growing 
Federal Capital Territory. 

4.3.3 Form Description: 
The first impression of Abuja Sheraton is that of a truncated pyramidal frustum. However, it would 
be more appropriate to interpret the structure as an Egyptian Mastaba punctured by holes. This 
system also attempts to redefine the tower podium concept by encapsulating the podium in the 
lower part of the Mastaba. The location of the conference hall, kitchen and Luigi restaurant is in 
the podium extending further from the main tower. As result of the shape of the tower, the rooms
were staggered vertically on top of each other to get equal room and corridor spaces. 
Moreover, this irregularity factor in the floor areas allowed only for single loaded corridors with 
empty spaces in between them which form a court yard round the whole hotel. The courtyard is 
housed by the building in a manner that it forms an atrium. More also, the courtyard is divided into 
two parts by an 8- story bridge which houses the shaft. The sloping sides of the towers are 
punctured by holes used for the balconies. This creates a feeling of array or voids and adds texture 
to the form of building. 

4.3.4 Architecture: 
The Abuja Sheraton's design is based on a regular square grid. The structural elements of the hotel 
were also based on square grid which forms a structural unit. These structural units form rooms, 
and the size of these rooms depends on the number of units used. They range from one unit for the 
standard bedroom to six for the presidential suites. The walls slant upwards in elevation and are 
supported by concrete beams and columns 
The design or the hotel considers a humane approach to architecture whereby lighting effects were 
used in the entrance lobby to excite and wet the user‘s appetite. Acrylic skylight was used to infuse 
light into these areas. The courtyard attempts to subdue the brutal atmosphere of most hotel 
accommodation tower by trying to bring the guest into the natural and humane perspective.

4.3.5 Construction and Materials: 
The on-site construction technique was predominantly adopted in the Abuja Sheraton Hotel 
building. This was due to the building's form, which did not allow for pre-fabrication of most parts 
of the building. Consequently, concrete was used extensively as a construction material. 
The exterior finishes of the building is mainly beige, polka doted 2.5cm main finish and ceramic 
tiles. These tiles were extensively used in the accommodation tower of the hotel and in the lower 
parts of the hotel building. Internally, numerous materials were used: matt water-proof wall paper, 
wood finish, marble tiles, internal railed vermiculite ceiling finishes, carpet finishes etc. Also 
lighting used in the internal design of the hotel ranged from hollow submerged lighting fixture in 
the entrance lobby to bed side lamps in the guest rooms.

4.3.6 Spaces and facilities available 671 Rooms: 
4 Presidential Suites 
2 Ambassadorial Suites 
16 Deluxe Suites 
32 Executive Suites 
613 Standard Rooms 
3 Restaurants 
Luigi's Restaurant 
Papillion Restaurant 
Mirabelle Restaurant 
Lobby Bar 
Gin Shops 
Car Rental 
Bank 
Courier Services 
Elephant Bar 
Night Club 
Casino 
Hairstylist 
Laundry 
8 Meeting Rooms (150 persons each) 
Conference Center (2500 person's capacity) 
Business Center 
2 Bars
Health fitness Center 
Gymnasium 
Saunas 
Stream Rooms 
Tennis Courts 
Juice Bar
Figure 4.12: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Perspective View showing the Balconies
Figure 4.13: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Lobby Bar Lit with Skylight.
Figure 4.14: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Papillon Top Roof Garden.
Figure 4.15: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Classic Room Spacious and Cross
Ventilated
Figure 4.16: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Obudu Restaurant with enough natural 
Lighting
Figure 4.17: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Conference Facilities Separated from The 
main Tower.
Figure 4.18: SHERATON HOTEL ABUJA – Arial View showing Location of facilities.
(Source: Modified from Google earth)

4.3.7 Appraisal 
Merits: 
The location of the hotel in serene valleys of Abuja presents interesting and exciting vista. 
The hotel posits a humane approach to the architecture by the use of well-lit spacious flowing 
spaces. 
The form of the hotel is so interesting that it charms many guests to the hotel. It allows for cross 
ventilation and natural lighting. 
What is splendid about the architecture of this hotel is the spatial transition from the lobby to the 
Courtyard.
The rooms all have balconies which allow the guests to get in touch with the natural 
environment. 
The interiors or the hotel arc made natural by the introduction of natural plants, fish ponds and 
lighting effect.
The landscaping of the courtyard has a touch of traditional effects with use of indigenous building 
materials like thatches. The north facing guest rooms are also ideal in order to keep out the intense 
tropical heat of the area. 
The number of rooms and restaurant facilities offers guests a wide range of options and 
satisfaction. 
The hotel also offers several recreational facilities to the guest, and more importantly satisfies 
tourists and vacationists. 

Demerits: 
As a result of the use of skylight in parts of the entrance lobby, parts of these areas that are not 
affected by this gesture appears dark and dull. 
The hotel design is too spread out for the comfort of the guest. This is depicted especially in the 
juxtaposition of restaurant spaces and conference spaces (Large Foot Print) 
The atrium is not enclosed, hence, the spaces immediately around and in the courtyard are affected 
by weather factors.
4.4 W Barcelona Hotel, Spain
W Barcelona Hotel, appears as a modern icon rising above the Mediterranean Sea, and is the 
landmark of this new area to be developed with high-end retail, office and entertainment venues. 
A sail shaped building on a 10 hectares’ land claimed from the sea, is included in an ambitious 
urban renovation plan of Barcelona coastline. W Barcelona Hotel is a five star-hotel with 480 
rooms, 67 suites, a roof top bar, large spa, indoor and outdoor pool, several food and beverage 
concepts and a retail store. 
The closest volume to the sea is a thin building 105 meters high perpendicular to the dike (1 
underground level, 1 ground floor level and 26 story). The reflecting façade of silver glass blends 
with the colors of the sky and the sparkles of the sea. Its allegoric shape is a reference point. This 
volume is inserted in the low atrium building, the lobby of which reveals views of the sea and 
enjoys zenith natural light. Public functions are accommodated under a platform conceived as two 
huge terraces. A big congress room with a large window over the sea breaks with its volume the 
horizontal lines of the base of the building. 
Architects: Ricardo Bofill & Jean Pierre Carniaux
Location: The site is located on the new entrance of Barcelona’s Port in Barcelona, Spain
Area: The building covers an area of 42.818 sqm on 10 hectares’ land
Duration: It was created 2010
Building Performance and Description:
A 26 story building, consist of 480 rooms, 67 suites, a roof top bar, a large spa, indoor and outdoor 
pool retail store.
It offers modern rooms equipped with a flat-screen TV with satellite channels, climate control and 
a writing desk. Every room at this hotel includes a pillow-top mattress, a down comforter and 
hypoallergenic pillows along with a microwave oven, an electric kettle and a fridge.
Salt & Beach Club restaurant serves Catalan cuisine. Guests can take fine drinks at the 24-hour 
bar.
A 20-minute walk takes you to Estació de França - Railway train station.
24-hour reception, 24-hour room service and newspaper service are also available at the 
accommodation.
Such various treatments as steam baths and massage services are offered on the premises. It 
features yoga classes and a fitness center to stay active and fit.
Facilities Available:
General Paid parking
Non-smoking rooms
Rooms/ Facilities for disabled
Lift
Safe deposit box
Currency exchange
Wi-Fi
24-hour reception
Electric kettle
Paid breakfast
Snack bar
Cafe
Dinner
Buffet breakfast
Leisure & Sports
Spa & wellness center
Luggage storage
Fireplace
Wheelchair access
Multilingual staff
Gift/Newsstand
Express check-in/ -out
Non-smoking property
24-hour check-in
Limited time reception
Beauty salon
Private beach
Public areas with access for disabled
Security
Lobby
Air conditioning in public areas
Electric vehicle charging station
Dining
Restaurant
In-room breakfast
Kitchenette
Poolside snack bar
Bell staff/Porter
Shops/Commercial services
Wedding services
Limousine service
Indoor swimming pool
Sauna
Fitness center
Outdoor swimming pool
Jacuzzi
Beach access
Solarium
Night club
Massage
Fitness studio
Sun terrace
Seasonal outdoor pool
Free cabanas
Sun loungers
Entertainment
Beach umbrellas
Beach towels
Public terrace/Patio
Services
Room service
Dry cleaning
24-hour room service
Bicycle rental
Business center
Fax/Photocopying
Laundry
Doctor on call
Airport shuttle
Microphone
Wake up service
Newspaper service
Meeting/ Banquet facilities
Paid airport shuttle
Business services
Self-service laundry
Tours/Ticket assistance
Room Amenities
Ironing facilities
Heating
Air conditioning
Television
Tea and coffee facilities
Hair dryer
Telephone
Mini-bar
Turndown service
Bathrobe
Sitting area
Terrace
Rollaway beds
Direct dial telephone
In-room safe
Sink
Flat-screen TV
Parquet floor
Cable/ Satellite television
Babysitting/Child services
Soundproofed rooms
In-room desk
Individual air conditioning
Paid films
Individual heating
Internet television
In-room Jacuzzi
Kids club
VIP room facilities
Down comforter
Source: https://w-barcelona.hotelbcn-barcelona.com/en/
Figure 4.19 W BARCELONA HOTEL - Site Plan of the 
Figure 4.20 W BARCELONA HOTEL – Floor Plan
Figure 4.21 W BARCELONA HOTEL – Typical Floor Plan
Figure 4.22 W BARCELONA HOTEL - Section
Figure 4.23 W BARCELONA HOTEL – Exterior View Showing Full Facade
Figure 4.24 W BARCELONA HOTEL – Lounge Lit with Skylight
Figure 4.25 W BARCELONA HOTEL – Bedroom Spacious and Well
Ventilated with a Good View
Figure 4.26 W BARCELONA HOTEL – Night View Showing the Lighting
