LEKKI HOTEL AND RESORTS FOR IBEJU LEKKI.
A role of Lighting and Aesthetics

CHAPTER ONE 

INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background to the Study 
The project "Hotel and Resorts" is proposed at Ibeju Lekki. The project is being proposed as part 
of Msc final school design. The activities proposed in the Resorts will be Hotel complex with 
convention centre, swimming pool, with retail and offices. The kind of Hotel proposed here is a 5-
star hotel. Hotel seems to be closely linked with the word inn which originally was a stop-over for 
travelers of the middle class who just wanted a place to lay the head for the night. Then, these 
places were not really commercially oriented and admitted only on goodwill. Later, the inn 
developed into a public place for the lodging and entertainment of travelers, or any person wishing 
to use the accommodation. Some of these inns became large and of more pretentious in nature and 
were referred to as hotels. 
The function of hotel has graduated from the early simple operation of providing guests with foods 
and a place to lay their heads to a wide variety of complex services which include Provision of 
lodging and comfortable accommodation, provision of assorted types of meals, provision of halls 
for conferences and seminars, provision of recreational and leisure facilities, Provision of laundry 
and cleaning services, provision of modern amenities like car hire service to guests, telephone and 
telex facilities, bank, shops, Provision of adequate parking facilities for guests‘ automobiles. 
A hotel is an establishment that provides paid lodging on a short-term basis. Hotel operations vary 
in size, function, and cost. Most hotels and major hospitality companies have set industry standards 
to classify hotel types. The word hotel is derived from the French hotel (coming from the same 
origin as hospital), which referred to a French version of a building seeing frequent visitors, and 
providing care, rather than a place offering accommodation.
Convention is the name given to a general or formal meeting of a legislative body, social or 
economic group in order to provide information on a particular economic situation and in order to 
deliberate and consequently, establish consent on policies among the participants. Usually of 
limited duration with set objectives but no determined frequency.
Conventions are usually general sessions, mostly information giving, often formed around a 
particular theme or subject matter of topic interest and increasingly accompanied by exhibits. In 
addition to need for large halls and auditoriums required for the plenary sessions, most conventions 
break down into smaller group to deliberate on particular matters of issues. The convention hotel 
is a multi-use facility where space needs of a convention centre is unified with the necessary 
accommodation needs of a hotel. The success of a hotel facility is in the ability to fill the local 
needs of the market. Secondly, although they require collaborations in time, the basic challenge of 
convention hotels are the convention centres.
5-star hotels are hotels which often contain full-sized luxury facilities with full-service 
accommodation and amenities. These hotels may attract both business conferences and 
vacationing tourist and offer more than a convenient place to stay. These hotels may be referred to 
as major conference and resorts hotels in a subject for market analysis. These hotels as destinations 
may be characterized by distinctive architecture, upscale lodgings, ballrooms, large conferences 
facilities, restaurants and recreation activities such as golf or skiing. they may be located in a 
variety of settings from major cities to remove location.
Difference between business hotel and proposed designed hotel & resorts
Business hotels are a resource, which are only used to complement the work of the offices in the 
city. They provide lodgings for business travelers, which come to your city’s offices to negotiate 
deals.
Unlike other business hotels the convention hotel has a rather communal life in space organizations 
and dimensions. If this cannot be seen in the private spaces, the reflection of this can be viewed in 
hospitality suits that are scattered at sub-levels that separates the public spaces from the private 
guest rooms.

1.2 Statement of the Problem
Most hotels around the world and Nigeria in particular seem to be highly synthetic. They depend 
so much on artificial means of lighting and ventilation paying less attention to tropical design 
principles. This has led to overall increase in the production of greenhouse gases (GHG) and sick 
building syndrome‖ (SBS). Less attention is paid to proper landscaping of the environment in such 
a way that users will appreciate nature. They lack natural features like water bodies and greenery 
which help to cool the environment naturally. 
Also, most hotels are not properly integrated with the environment considering site terrain and 
climatic factors. It has increased impacts of building construction on ecological systems and 
biodiversity, while decreasing the ecological values of site. 

1.3 Aims and Objectives of the Study
The general aim of this study is to design a 5-star hotel and resort, which will be environmentally 
serene and aesthetically pleasing to serve as a tourist centre and a relaxation place, being proposed 
at Ibeju Lekki, Lagos State.

1.4 Objectives of the Study
i. Creating an exciting commercially successful hotel and resort, thereby improving the 
region’s ability to attract revenue-generating conventions though the implementation of 
lighting and aesthetics.
ii. Complementing and enhancing the existing Hotel facilities
iii. Operating an integrated Hotel facility, accommodating difference needs for a variety of 
user through the use of natural lighting.
iv. Using the appropriate Lighting and aesthetically pleasing materials to promote a platform 
for interaction between various sections of society. 
v. Integrating current technologies in the field and a plan for future growth.

1.5 Research Questions
i. What are the various principles and techniques associated with lighting and aesthetics in 
building?
ii. What are the peculiarities and problems and how can we improve the study environment 
with particular reference to hotel design?
iii. Are there any benefits of applying natural lighting strategies to a tropical hotel design?
iv. What are the most appropriate materials applicable in aesthetic hotel in tropical 
environment. 
v. How can we integrate current technologies in the field and a plan for future growth?

1.6 Scope of the Study/Project
The scope of the project is viable at the location of the site to fulfil the requirement of a hotel and 
a resorts, to increase tourism and hence the economy of the country. 
The scope is to provide a well establish hospitality experience to the user
It will increase infrastructure of the area 
It will provide healthy, green and safe premises
The proposed design will integrate with surroundings and serve as fundamental space for the 
community 

1.7 Limitation of the Study
Lighting and aesthetics in building encompasses a lot but the study will major on, examination of 
various principles and techniques associated with building practices, the benefits of applying 
lighting building strategies to a 5-hotel design and practical illustration of the application of 
aesthetics building strategies in hotels. It will explore various design and construction principles 
that minimizes energy consumption in terms of lighting, improve indoor environmental quality, 
material usage, land use and site in hotels. 

1.8 Personal Outlook
This project has been proposed, as it would allow to explore the various aspects of spaces involved 
in the hotel and their interplay, evolution of inviting form and aesthetically captivating exterior 
with well-planned internal spaces.
As it has restaurants, gym and spa, rooms, exhibition areas. Meeting rooms, board rooms, pool, 
landscaping elements and a lot of services that needs to be catered to all in one project and the 
pressure to create a better design in competition to its neighboring hotels.
It would allow the researcher and designer to develop some innovative and creative concepts that 
has never been used before which could help revolutionized the hotel industry.
Therefore, through strategies and tactics of architecture, I shall re-imagine these commercial 
designs to truly be for the public and benefit their urban surrounding effectively and consistently